Once upon a time there was a woodcutter and a woodcutter's wife who had seven children, all boys.

They were very poor, and their seven children troubled them greatly, because none of them could yet earn a living. What saddened them even more was that the youngest was very delicate and did not speak a word; they took for stupidity what was a sign of the goodness of his mind. He was very small, and when he was born he was hardly bigger than a thumb, which is why he was called Little Thumb.

This poor child was the scapegoat of the house, and he was always blamed. However, he was the cleverest and most thoughtful of all his brothers, and though he spoke little, he listened a lot.

There came a very bad year, and the famine was so great that these poor people decided to get rid of their children. One evening when the children were in bed and the woodcutter was by the fire with his wife, he said to her with a heart heavy with sorrow: "You see well that we can no longer feed our children; I cannot bear to see them die of hunger before my eyes, and I have decided to lead them into the woods tomorrow and lose them, which will be easy, for while they amuse themselves gathering sticks, we will only have to run away without them seeing us." "Ah!" cried the woodcutter's wife, "could you yourself lead your children to be lost!" Her husband tried in vain to show her their great poverty; she could not agree. She was poor, but she was their mother. However, after considering what pain it would be to see them die of hunger, she agreed and went to bed weeping.

Little Thumb heard all they said, for having heard from his bed that they were speaking of business, he had quietly gotten up and slipped under his father's stool to listen without being seen. He went back to bed and did not sleep the rest of the night, thinking about what he had to do. He got up very early and went to the edge of a stream, where he filled his pockets with small white pebbles, and then returned home. They set off, and Little Thumb said nothing of what he knew to his brothers.

They went into a very thick forest, where at ten paces you could not see one another. The woodcutter began to cut wood and his children to gather brushwood to make bundles. The father and mother, seeing them busy working, slipped away from them little by little and then suddenly ran off along a small side path.

When the children saw themselves alone, they began to cry and shout with all their might. Little Thumb let them cry, knowing well how he would return home, for as he walked he had dropped the little white pebbles along the path from his pockets. He said to them, "Do not be afraid, my brothers; my father and mother have left us here, but I will take you back home; just follow me." They followed him, and he led them back to their house by the same path they had come into the forest. At first they did not dare to go in, but they stood by the door to listen to what their father and mother were saying.

At the moment the woodcutter and his wife arrived home, the lord of the village sent them ten crowns that he had owed them for a long time and from which they no longer expected anything. This brought them back to life, for the poor people were dying of hunger. The woodcutter immediately sent his wife to the butcher. Since she had not eaten for a long time, she bought three times more meat than was needed for the supper of two people. When they were full, the woodcutter's wife said, "Alas, where are our poor children now! They would feast on what is left here. But also, Guillaume, it is you who wanted to lose them; I said we would regret it. What are they doing now in that forest? Alas, my God, the wolves may already have eaten them! You are very inhuman to have lost your children like this!"

At last the woodcutter grew impatient, for she repeated more than twenty times that they would regret it and that she had said so. He threatened to beat her if she did not keep quiet. It was not that the woodcutter was not perhaps even more upset than his wife, but she was breaking his head, and he was like many others who like women who speak well but find very annoying those who have always spoken well.

The woodcutter's wife was in tears: "Alas, where are my children, my poor children!" She said it once so loudly that the children, who were at the door, heard her and cried out together, "Here we are! here we are!" She ran quickly to open the door and said, embracing them, "How glad I am to see you again, my dear children! You are very tired and very hungry; and you, Pierrot, how muddy you are, come let me clean you." This Pierrot was her eldest son, whom she loved more than all the others because he was a little red-haired and she was a little red-haired. They sat at the table and ate with an appetite that pleased the father and mother, to whom they told the fear they had had in the forest, almost always speaking all together. These good people were delighted to see their children again, and this joy lasted as long as the ten crowns lasted.

But when the money was spent, they fell back into their first sorrow and decided to lose them again; and to be sure of their plan, to lead them much farther than the first time.

They could not speak of this so secretly that they were not heard by Little Thumb, who planned to get out of trouble as he had before; but although he got up very early to gather little pebbles, he could not manage it, for he found the door of the house locked with a double turn. He did not know what to do when the woodcutter's wife gave each of them a piece of bread for breakfast; he thought he could use his bread instead of pebbles by throwing crumbs along the paths where they would pass, so he put it in his pocket.

The father and mother led them to the deepest and darkest part of the forest, and as soon as they were there, they slipped away and left them. Little Thumb was not very troubled, because he thought he could easily find his way by means of his bread which he had scattered everywhere he had passed; but he was very surprised when he could not find a single crumb: the birds had come and eaten everything.

So there they were very distressed; the more they walked, the more they got lost and went deeper into the forest. Night came, and a great wind arose that frightened them terribly. They thought they heard on all sides the howling of wolves coming to eat them. They hardly dared speak or turn their heads. A heavy rain came that soaked them to the bone; they slipped at every step and fell into the mud, from which they got up all covered in dirt, not knowing what to do with their hands.

Little Thumb climbed to the top of a tree to see if he could discover anything; turning his head in all directions, he saw a small light like a candle, but very far away beyond the forest. He came down from the tree, and when he was on the ground he saw nothing more; this distressed him. However, after walking some time with his brothers in the direction where he had seen the light, he saw it again when he came out of the wood.

They finally arrived at the house where that candle was, not without much fear, for often they lost sight of it, which happened every time they went down into hollows. They knocked on the door and a good woman came to open it. She asked them what they wanted. Little Thumb told her they were poor children who had lost their way in the forest and asked to sleep there out of charity. This woman, seeing them all so pretty, began to cry and said, "Alas, my poor children, where have you come? Do you know that this is the house of an Ogre who eats little children?" "Alas, madam," replied Little Thumb, trembling with all his strength, as well as his brothers, "what shall we do? The wolves of the forest will surely eat us tonight if you do not take us into your house, and since that is so, we would rather that Monsieur eat us; perhaps he will have pity on us if you will kindly ask him." The Ogre's wife, who believed she could hide them from her husband until the next morning, let them enter and led them to warm themselves by a good fire; for there was a whole sheep on the spit for the Ogre's supper.
